# How Do We Calculate Power?

As you can imagine, calculating the power output of a paddler is no mean feat. If you're interested in the more nitty-gritty aspects of how we do it, this section is for you. 
##Calculating power - what's involved?
First up, we developed strain measurement specific to composite materials (carbon fiber) in order to measure the forces applied by the paddler. We also developed a unique algorithm, one that combines theories of hydrodynamics and kinematics to measure the motion of the paddle as it is manipulated by the paddler in order to calculate their power output.  
###Power
To get the most out of your power meter it is important that you understand how the device functions, and more importantly, what factors contribute to the data you observe on the water or during post analysis.
A power meter measures the power applied to the paddle by the athlete. By doing this, the power value represents the energy output rate of the paddler (Watts), and provides a direct measure of the athlete's intensity. 
Understanding that the power is measured in this way is important: the power value includes both the efficient and in-efficient power generated in a single value. Not all of the power applied to the paddle will result in forward propulsion of the boat. A higher power value does not guarantee increased boat speed.
The primary use of a power meter, in a sporting application, is to measure the intensity of the athlete - in this case, the rate of energy production of the paddler. This direct measure of intensity is important for setting training levels, tracking fitness development, improving efficiency and race planning. 
The power value shown in real time (on a compatible ANT+ display) represents the average power generated during the entire stroke, not just the drive phase of the stroke. This includes the glide phase, where the paddle isn’t in the water. The “stroke” is defined as the event that occurs between catches (stroke = catch + drive + glide). It is important that the glide phase is taken into account when calculating the power value. The power value is a measure of intensity (energy output per second) and the glide time contributes to the overall level of intensity. For example, paddling with a long glide (paddle is out of the water for a long duration) requires less intensity than paddling with a shorter glide time.
The beauty of the Kayak|Canoe|SUP Power Meter is that it takes a direct measurement of the exact thing that governs performance – energy output. The science is simple: The more energy output, the faster the boat can go. The challenge for the athlete is to increase their fitness and strength such that they improve their energy output and to convert as much of the energy into forward motion. The One Giant Leap Power Meters have been designed specifically as the tool that will help achieve these goals.
###Cadence
Cadence is a measure of stroke rate, or the frequency at which the athlete is paddling. Cadence data is delivered in single strokes per minute.
Cadence is determined by measuring the time elapsed between the catch of each stroke. A low force threshold has been set so that the trigger for the stroke “start” is as representative of the blade entry as possible.
Cadence is one of the many variables that determine your level of performance and efficiency. The Kayak|Canoe|SUP Power Meter can help you find your optimum cadence – the cadence at which you can maintain the highest possible average power.
###Force (High Speed Data)
The force values are delivered in two data streams; pushing hand force and pulling hand force.
These values represent the force applied by the pushing hand (pushing during the stroke) and the pulling hand (pulling during the stroke). For example, during the stroke that occurs on the left side of the boat, the pushing hand force represents the right hand, and the pulling hand force represents left hand.
The force values are determined by strain gauges which are located on the shaft, and convert the amount of shaft bending they experience to hand-force values. Since the gauges measure shaft bending, hand position is an important factor. Hand positions must be uploaded correctly during the setup of the Kayak Power Meter. Hand positions have to be re-entered if the athlete decides to change their hand positions (e.g. opt for a wider grip), or the paddle length (e.g. extend the paddle by a few centimeters). Many athletes attach tape to the paddle shaft to create a physical marker which they can feel in order to keep their hands at the fixed position on the shaft. This is recommended.